Hello and welcome to Veteran to the Valley.
I'm Tom Terbaville.
Alfred Whitey Birdwell was a Sherman Tank driver in World War II's European theater.
After D-Day, but during the final push in the Battle of the Bulge and until victory in
Europe.
He was overseas just more than a year, but probably covered more miles per day served than
just about anyone.
He proudly recalls when he drove the first American tank over the Ryan River for the
third armored spearheads, a purple heart recipient.
He drove a tank every day except for those ten days that he was laid up because of
Shrapnel wounds.
Now, 91 years old, he has another fascinating story of World War II service that we are
honored to tell.
So welcome.
Whitey Birdwell to Veteran to the Valley.
Whitey, it is a pleasure to have you.
I got to meet you back on May 1st when we were honored to take the Lone Star Honor
Flight trip to Washington.
And that was a great trip that we've been able to review here on Veterans of the Valley.
But we're here today to talk about your life and your service.
You're a Texan.
You grew up in Henderson.
Absolutely.
Sort of take us through, you know, from Henderson.
And you worked for a while, but couldn't find steady work.
So you said the day after you got laid off from a job, you got drafted, is that right?
All I had were just neighborhood work until that time.
And when the defense work started, we went down to Beaumont and went to work for Loomis
Company where we were making beauty dying for the tires.
And we built that plant there.
And we finished it up on the day that I finished my job on the afternoon.
And I got my draft card the next morning.
So I went into Houston and they saw me in.
And so I waited six weeks and then went down to Fort Sound, Houston and they put me in
uniform.
Well, you were married and had two kids at the time and you were only making about $1.10
an hour at your job.
So this was probably better for you to be in the Army.
You went into the Army in March of 43, overseas to Europe January the first 1944 and a fascinating
part of your family history is that you had five brothers and they all served in World
War II.
All six of you, right?
Right.
Served in World War II.
And two, one other is still alive today.
Yeah, right at three years.
Three of you are still alive.
My brother just served in North Africa and the one that was in the Navy is the baby brother.
Right.
Still leaving.
And then you said in the opening you were a tank driver.
That's what you were trained to do.
You drove lead tank for a first-petune, the third-armored division and they're called the
spearheads.
Talk a little bit about the spearheads in that unit.
Well, our job was to go through the German lines and cut them into and break their communications
and the other truth for to come behind and clean up and that's what we did.
Right.
So that was the, they told us that when you get started, don't stop.
Don't stop for anything because it's just like a wave of water in front of a car.
When you stop and it laughs you back on this hard to start again.
So drive through.
Just keep driving.
Don't stop.
You'll get stuck.
When you get a move and move them.
I'm always fascinated by veterans who did serve in the European theater about how they
got there and you went aboard a converted luxury ship or passenger ship, the Queen Mary.
Oh, the Queen Mary, yes.
That's your deal.
Yeah.
I don't know how many truth food on it, but it was the wall to wall.
And kind of hard eat that lamy cook and then drink the coffee and tea mixed together.
We made it.
Somehow you did it.
You left for Boston Harbor and what had you wanted to take you a week?
It took six days in England.
Right.
You know, the seventh day it was in the Harv France.
So you landed in England, you took the train down and actually took an LST across the channel
and landed in Lahore, France.
Yes.
First you thought you were going to North Africa, is that right?
No, they sit well in training.
In training, but they didn't know how the war was moving.
And so when they found out that North Africa was getting along just fine and they decided
to send us over to Germany and just hit the heart of the Germans there in Germany and
hit the glows of the gate on them.
Right.
Talk a little bit more about your mission and the service of your particular mission because
you were in Lahore, France and your job like you said was to cut through the German
lines and just sort of disrupt things and band them together.
Talk a little bit more specifically about that.
Well, I'll be just like that.
Applying a field.
When you drive through, the Germans go this way.
Yes, sir.
And then we had the fourth armoured on one side of us.
Well, one now e-cup me on one side of us and another company on the other side and
we just kind of plow them in together and then the rear-rashel armoured come along and
pick them up and send them back to the prison camp.
Right.
So they were the ones that were more in charge of taking them as prisoner.
You were the one that sort of banded them together and said, Mark's along.
Well, the only time that we took prisoners is when they gave up on the front line.
Right.
They were guns and helmets and just sent them back down the road.
You said at the time that you did encounter resistance.
Oh, yeah.
But those who wanted to surrender gave up.
They gave up.
They weren't ready.
They didn't want war anymore in themselves.
Home guards.
Yeah.
There were people who were scripted in the army as home guards.
Right.
And the roughest one that we faced was the hip to youth and the SS.
That was the reference.
Right.
Those are the ones that you had to give resistance back to.
Back to, yeah.
Right.
Because of, right.
Talk about, oh, you talked about your tank and how you sort of camouflage your tank to
keep the Germans from knowing exactly who you all were.
You had a little bit of unique way of doing that.
I don't know.
We didn't do that so much as some of the other guys did who were in the holding position.
We were moving.
We didn't have time to do that.
We just had to record our me color on it.
Right.
It was steel.
The only time.
Well, I had a piece of steel on the front of it.
Right.
That's what I meant.
Yeah.
That's what I was talking about.
I got into the steel mill in Germany.
I saw this piece of soft metal steel there.
It was pretty thick and I asked the sergeant, I said, can you put that on the front of my
tank to cover up that star?
Uh-huh.
He called the vehicle over there and picked it up well in the front of the tank.
My tank run like a mad horse with a tail up in there with that heavy piece of metal
in the front.
Right.
It really did the job because they had a lot of gouges in it.
So now as a tank, you drove the tank.
There were five in each tank, right?
Five in each tank.
Right.
So did your entire brigade or your unit had about the fire power of 17 tanks, right?
Well, yes.
Because we had five tanks online and we had the Air Force observer and the artillery observer
in the tank.
So we had two extra tanks.
Right.
We had 17 and fire power.
You are a receiver of the Purple Heart.
You did earn the Purple Heart.
I guess if that's the word for it, I guess it's not something that people strive for.
We were talking about the circumstances of your, of how you were wounded because you
were trying to, you were trying to help a fellow soldier.
Well, we were, they were sent up on the hill to observe and we got up there.
We didn't see anything.
Of course, of course, we took a field glasses and looked around and the sister driver got
out to throw a hay on the tank to camouflage it.
And that's when the mortar fire started coming in and good as arm off.
And so he was just in limbo out there not knowing, you know, just crazy.
When you get hit that way, the, I don't know how, well, you know, I don't know how you
feel.
I don't know how to explain it except he was just out there in La La Landland suffering.
Right.
So I jumped out the tank and hit him in the fox over there.
So the mortar fire kept coming in and it was hit on the side and the ground was shaking
as the next one is going to be in here on top of it and get both of us.
So if I can get out and let them follow me with, it would save him.
But when I jumped out, I was foot slipped on a, about your hay and I laid there and that's
when the mortar fire hit me.
And I tell everybody, I said, well, you know what you have going when I got shot because
I got shot.
But he just got me started and I got out there.
129 pieces of shrapnel they took out of you, right?
Put it in a little deer like that and I lost it somewhere.
Yeah.
And I was just doing it here.
But you were, you were able to get up and go to see it.
It didn't cripple me.
They just sent me to hospital in fetching.
Right.
And to get the shrapnel out that was there.
So they dug it out and popped it out and give me penicillin and I was all right after
that.
And you understand that the fellow that you, the soldier that you were trying to help,
he was sent off to England, I guess.
Yeah, he was in hospital.
But he survived his wound as far as you know, but you never heard any more from him.
Right.
Well, he probably remembers the guy that jumped in the fox hole with him.
I'm sure if he's alive today, I'm sure he remembers that.
They call me Tex, so I remember.
After your hospital now, you were sent back to work.
You were in the hospital for nine to ten days and talk about after you were in the hospital,
you wanted to go back to the front lines.
I did go back to the right line.
I'd say for space there was the front line.
Exactly.
So I went back and they were in Cologne and that's where I was wounded on the Cologne
claims and they were in Cologne waiting for the bridge to be built because they were
able to jump off again.
So I went back and got old tank and drove the first one across the Rhine River.
Talk about that.
That's quite significant, I think, as the first tank to drive it was over a pontoon bridge.
Well, right.
Over the Rhine River.
The pontoons were huge and my brother-in-law was there.
I had to get a glimpse of him and I didn't get to talk to him because he was too busy.
They just come and put a bridge and took off.
They were huge pontoons and they tied them off on each side of the river because it was
real swift.
And then they tied them together with steel with pins and then they laid the track across
them where it would work.
And when I looked at that thing I said, well, I don't know, I'm going to leave my hatch
off in case I go down.
I could get out of this tank.
But they were good, they supplied them real good.
And so it would just go down and up, down and up.
So we had to take our time and go across them and not really rush them, but just go with
the flow.
Right.
And so we all trucks and all of them made it across.
We were good.
Right.
It was a, it was Whitey Bird Wells Unit as a matter of fact that as we read that fired
one of the first shells into Germany of the war.
And the 110 mile march, you went back for, you went with those people, right?
We went back, it was our time to go back for a rest and maintenance and a tank.
And we went back a half a day when they told us we had to jump off because the 104th Infantry
Division had the Germans had a giveaway and they followed them up.
And they said, well, we got 110 miles to go before nightfall, get you.
So we made it up to within about, I guess about 15 miles of the town.
And when the Germans shot the third tank driver's head over the Pizzucco.
And so that kind of disrupted the march.
They just got together and decided, well, we got to have somebody in town to let the
Germans know that we've arrived.
And the diesel tank didn't have any exhaust flash from it with the radio tanks did.
It was a burnt 90 out of 10 gas and it was a huge flame coming out of the exhaust light.
So then I did the night duty anyway because they couldn't pick me up other than sound.
So I followed the tanks sergeant in the town with the luminous button on his belt.
And I just had to stay so close to him.
We got into that town and I couldn't, I don't know how much further I could have went,
but I don't think there are four of them because we were 110 miles and we were taking diesel
as a long way.
Right.
And you were pretty much out of ammunition.
Well out of ammunition and all that stuff.
We couldn't have thought of a very good battle with what we had left.
Anyway, the German heard us coming in and they started moving out.
They didn't know you were out of ammunition.
They just knew you were there.
And now what you don't tell them?
You never gonna tell them.
So your job sort of switched.
Your job was to support the infantry.
But they were taking job all the way through with support to infantry.
That's right.
And with this strategy, they were taking care of you.
They did.
Yeah.
They did a good job to it.
The 104th grade that they never lost a tank and they didn't.
Right.
Right there with us.
And you're glad because you're one of the tanks they didn't lose.
I didn't think.
Talk about how I've always been fascinated to ask people, you know, as a 22, 23 year old
kid from Henderson, Texas.
How did you feel having made the transition from being just a young Texas kid into warfare?
I mean, you had to rely and trust on your training and off a lot.
Right.
And to start with, I was scared to death.
Yes, sir.
But you automatically do what the training is.
It's something that has to kick in.
So the training did.
But I wasn't so fearful after I kind of got used to what was going on.
Right.
Because I was busy taking care of ourselves, you know, in the battle and whatever.
And listening to the orders that, of course, you're captain, always trying to take care
of you anyway.
Because he was back observing what was going on.
So when you don't realize when you're in basic training, how much the safety of it kicks
in until you're there.
Right.
But it just automatically kicks in and you do the thing that you need to do to preserve
yourself.
You were in Europe for the better part, almost the entire part of the year of 1944, which
is, you know, arguably the most significant year of the war as far as the European theater
is concerned.
You were during this, you were in this move through Germany.
When D.D.
occurred in June of 1944, you were there.
Were you all getting any news or anything like that that there was an invasion and an
Normandy that the decision had been made to make the final push and to defeat Hitler
by making this final push.
Were you all aware of sort of how the, what was happening in the war rooms?
Well, we knew when Hitler killed himself.
Right.
And we were more or less brought up through not by news, but by word of mouth from here
to there and the paper that they gave us.
And so we kind of kept up on that all the way through.
And we knew where the different units were because they were reported in the stars of
stripes.
Exactly.
They let us know that we did have company over there.
Right.
Yeah.
And so that gave us assurance that he put us out of the whole country.
Winner of 1944, 45, that was in the Battle of the Bulge.
And whenever I talk to anybody who served in the Battle of the Bulge, they talk about the
weather.
They talk about the cold.
How do you, how do you describe it?
Well, if he was at the North Pole, you would know it was terrific to tell you that we had
our tanks eating the snow.
Is that right?
And well, I don't know other than say that we just had six to put a snow and you couldn't
touch the tank with a bare hand.
You had to stick to it.
Right.
And I don't know how we made out, but we did.
We lived through it.
We didn't have any casualties there.
We knocked out one German tank that had come through lumber and through.
And the first guy who was a tank sergeant called him pork, he said, oh, we're not going
to do this.
We're going to win the gets further down the line and we'll have more support.
Right.
But when he come down there, we put a white faucet on him.
And they come out like blackwashed or for nests.
So we didn't have any trouble with him.
I'm just knocked out and burned.
Right.
Got three images I want to show you.
Wadi bird well.
This is your patch, which you have actually on the hat that you're wearing today too.
There's a close up of it of the third Armored Division spearhead.
That's the insignia.
This is something that I came across that I found.
It's a sketch, actually.
And that is a major general rose in the top of that tank.
And he was actually, this is a depiction of the time that through a misunderstanding that
he was actually killed at this time.
And this was a depiction actually of the moments just prior to his murder.
And you speak of major general rose.
And that's sort of a look of what the kind of tank that you had and that you were driving.
And you say not many generals rodent tanks, right?
That's right.
They didn't.
Well, they weren't in many generals on the line.
Exactly.
Because they were back in the direction, didn't direct in the army.
And keeping up with casualties and all this.
And they gave, of course, they gave the orders to marching orders.
And this kind of thing, but they had a tremendous job to do to take care of everything other
than just being on line.
Right.
There's another sketch in the back end of a Sherman tank.
Of the type of tank that, quite a bird well, piloted.
And some of the terrain was quite interesting, I guess, right?
It stuck in the mud.
Well, we were driving and we had some anti-aircraft guns up on the hill and we wanted to die
so we got down low and going up by a valley.
And, of course, I got in the quicksand and I went down.
Right.
So I had to stay there that night.
And so for that anti-air tank fire for two or three hours.
And some of the ifs we got hurt.
Right.
Something down deep enough that the water was coming in our tank.
Tell me the story that you were telling me before we started today.
The story that you forgot to tell me the other day.
Oh, we were.
And we carried our infantry up there, if we were the men's derisions.
We went back to a little town called Sugartown.
It was super stop.
That's what they call it, villages with stops.
And so we carried them up there and we were back, of course, in the holding position.
We thought everything was over and clear back there.
But one morning, I think about three days
as we carried our infantry up, the Germans come in on this.
Right.
And I was in the tank at the time.
But the captains driver come running up and said,
Germans is in town.
So I said, well, go wake the guys up.
Not going to do it and holler help or something and just get them out of here.
And I said, I'll take my rifle and play infantry.
The grave guard was right across the street.
And so I said, you can drive my tank.
And I'll be out there and try to keep them all from you.
So I got out there and fired one shot in my rifle, large.
I said down there, the grave guard, they kicking up their dread.
We didn't wait.
It turned out real good.
You know, because you're here talking to me.
I'm here talking to you.
They came by and I didn't know where the Germans were located.
I knew that they were around that grave guard.
So of course, they didn't come through the grave guard with my tank.
And I didn't go across the fence.
But anyway, they got down in the ways and they decided, well, we better come back.
So they'd come back far in the machine.
You know me and I got over the fence and followed the tank out.
Everything turned out real good.
We got it lasted about three or four hours.
We got them all cleaned out.
When the war in Europe ended, you came back into holding patterns.
That came back through a rest camp and sort of talk about what you did.
A lot of the soldiers and the military people were told immediately, well, you're going
to put your own boats and we're going to go over to Japan because we're going to fight
a ground war there.
But that was not part of your mission.
Talk about what your mission was.
Our mission was just to set up military government to clean the towns and pick up the arms
and ammunition that was left over and kind of establish a pattern of government for
them.
We got back from up there to an SS rest camp.
I don't know where it was really.
But anyway, it was a nice log encampment there.
We stayed there three days and nights and got everything ready.
And we were pulled back to Moorfell and brought it on the line and stayed there several
weeks until we got down cleaned up.
And then the military government took over and when they take over, we'd move out to
another town and cleaned it up and let the military come in.
We wound up the last place we were at was down in Swabish Hall, down in southern Germany.
And that's where we broke up and they put us on their cattle cars just to up to the
North Sea and put us on the boat and brought us on there.
It made up a load.
In January 12, 1945, so you were overseas just over a year.
And you said you went probably in the years time, you probably traveled about as far as
anybody.
Is anybody possibly could in one year's time?
Well, I didn't go through, of course, I would look.
I didn't go through North Africa or didn't come through Italy.
But I went all the way through French, Belgium and Germany.
Exactly.
And you came home, you had almost, they tried to leave you, right?
When you were coming home, they told you there were a lot of...
Well, we got back into...
You asked Mark them.
We went down to Pittsburgh.
We tried to see everything we could see while we was on that trip, but we didn't figure
that we would ever have an opportunity to go back.
So we went down to Pittsburgh and got back into camp, but they'd already shipped out.
So we just grabbed our bags and got on the train and it was coming to take us.
Yep.
And I was like, I'm going to have a little time, I could talk back to a girl.
But you ended up getting back before the rest of it, right?
You ended up getting back before the rest of it, right?
Sure did.
I got my dish jarring before the rest of the testing board.
Yeah, they made room in the aisles for you to get home.
You came home, you tried to get work and I looked this up because you made reference to
it that you joined the 52-20 club.
And I found out what that was and it says...
At the time veterans were eligible to collect unemployment benefits for a period of one year,
the amount paid was $20 a week for 52 weeks, hence the 52-20 club.
At that time, $20 a week was a fairish amount of money and that would roughly equate to about
$400 a week in today's dollars.
That would be about pay for that.
But it was rough finding work.
There wasn't any.
Coming back, there wasn't any.
Wasn't any work.
So you were a 52-20 guy.
But eventually you did work and talked to sort of about what your career.
I know you were in trucking, refinery business.
Well, I started out driving a truck and that was a low-paying job but it was better than
a farmhand.
Right.
And so I just went from there to construction work.
And when they...
Time began to change and of course the refineries were trying to build themselves up, you know,
and in repair.
Ford Becken Davis had a job going in the car behind and so I took off down to Texas City
and went to work for Ford Becken Davis.
Right.
And I stayed down there for a number of years and work construction work.
And I worked there and free for work.
Galveston Houston.
Then went to Chicago and worked there and I worked for it out there and wherever the
work was.
Who's house did you live in in Chicago?
Paul Harvey's house.
He actually owned the house that you lease, right?
He owned the house, did I lease it?
So he was your landlord.
It was Paul Harvey.
He was in California at the time.
And that's the rest of the story there.
Yeah.
So he was in California at the time.
That's right.
You even talked about one time you actually lost a job indirectly because of Watergate.
Well, I was in Phoenix working for Martin Construction.
And the Martin...
He was part of the Richard Nixon.
Well, at one point in California, I think it was a representative of Shantan Center.
And he was mixed up in the Watergate, but he had previously bought in with the Martin's
of Phoenix.
And so when this Watergate broke, we went out to job that morning and they said, clean
up, boys, we're through.
We're going to be out of here in eight hours.
That's a tough way to lose a job.
We're just about out of time, Wendy.
And I want to thank you.
Your first wife, Edith, died of cancer.
But and you all had lost a child, but you had six children and you married Patsy in
1965 and she had five children and together 11.
And thank you for being with us.
We appreciate it.
Thank you for your service.
I lived in a wonderful world of women.
Lucky you.
Wadi Birdwell and his wife, Patsy, were married in 1965 and between them 11 children.
13 grandkids and 31 great grandkids and all can be justly proud of Wadi's service
to our country.
We salute him as we do all veterans.
I'm Tom Turbaville.
Join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.